[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>In our now last
talk, I was trying
to explain what
training in Zen Buddhism
does to change
human consciousness.
And I showed that it takes
away our ingrained tendency
to block ourselves
in thought and action
by the mechanisms of
self-consciousness.
It doesn't mean that a person
can't be self-conscious anymore
but he can't think
about what he has to do
and how to control himself.
But he no longer experiences
his observing self-- you know,
the self that says, what
will other people think?
Do I make sense?
Am I right?
He no longer senses
this as an obstacle.
And he receives training
in acting spontaneously
rather than deliberately.
And as I pointed out,
that as a way of action
which we are not
ordinarily taught.
All our education
consists in knowing
how to act and
think deliberately.
And this gives a certain
stickiness or artificiality
to everything that we do.
But when he has been put
through this training, which
involves a kind of dying to
himself-- that is to say,
he gets in a
situation where he's
faced with an unanswerable
question, the koan, the zen
problem for meditation.
And all his wits are
exhausted in trying
to answer this question.
The question being, in
effect, however it is phrased,
to perform perfectly is
spontaneous, genuine, natural
act.
Express your true self.
And nobody can do
that intentionally.
You know, there's
a proverb in India
that if you think of a monkey
while you're drinking medicine,
the medicine doesn't cure you.
So imagine a person trying
not to think of a monkey
while taking medicine.
That's the sort of bind we get
into when we try intentionally
to be natural.
And it's only when all
our intentional wisdom,
our contriving wisdom is
frustrated and brought
to an end, brought to a
kind of death-- at any rate,
temporarily-- that a completely
genuine action as possible.
As a Western saying goes, man's
extremity is God's opportunity.
Now, you might
raise the question,
how does a person express
this kind of freedom?
I finished last time on
the note of the Zen student
being as free as the
clouds in the water.
The image of the clouds
drifting unobstructedly
through the sky, the
water flowing on,
always taking the line
of least resistance,
but always overcoming even
the hardest obstacles.
If a person acts
without inner conflict,
and he acts with true
spontaneity, how does he act?
What does he do to
express himself?
And I think one of the
very best examples of this
is from the influence of Zen
upon Far Eastern painting.
The art of China and Japan
has been very, very profoundly
influenced by Zen.
Now, I suppose most of you
know that Chinese painting is
intimately connected with
Chinese writing, which
was originally a
pictographic language.
You can see for example
here, how at the top left
the pictogram of mountains
has become the formal symbol
written with a brush,
which now means
mountain or hill in
Chinese characters.
It's pretty obvious
how concrete objects
can be represented
by a pictogram.
And it's interesting to see
how abstract ideas can also
be conveyed.
The next drawing you see
the shows at the top right
the pictogram of a lizard.
And below the formal brush
character as now written,
which means change,
perhaps because this
was a chameleon who
changed color according
to his background, or
perhaps because the movements
of the lizard are so
slippery and rapid.
And then again, you can see
another abstract idea conveyed.
The pictogram at the top shows
a mat with a pattern on it.
And the formal brush-written
character below means cause.
Because just as a mat is a
firm basis for something,
so it represents the cause
of a certain situation.
Now, every child
brought up in China
learns the discipline of writing
these characters, and to learn,
as it were, the alphabetic
characters-- how, for example,
to make a cross stroke,
which should look something
like a bone.
Or he learns perhaps
the character
which is supposed to contain
all the strokes, the character
meaning eternal.
A lot of you have seen
this writing and work
done by Mr. [? Maconie ?],
who's a real artist.
And I don't pretend to be
any great calligrapher.
But I'm just showing you
that the art of the brush
involves endless,
endless practice
to get these things correct.
In other words, I haven't
done this very well here,
because the top
of this character
should be more stubby.
But of course, I'm
doing something
I shouldn't really do at
all, and that's touch up.
All the characters are made
up of certain basic elements.
There are certain basic strokes.
This is supposed to involve
about seven of them.
One, two, three,
four, five, six.
I don't know where
the seventh is.
But in learning these
basic strokes, which
are practiced again
and again and again,
the person studying
Chinese writing
acquires, as it were, not
an alphabet in our sense,
but an alphabet of strokes.
Now, in exactly the same
way in the art of painting.
Chinese painting is made up of
an alphabet of various strokes
that convey various things.
And you can see, for example,
how the brush lends itself
quite naturally to
drawing certain form.
If we take, for example,
just-- that's rather wiggly.
But here is the
leaf of a bamboo.
See?
The brush draws it naturally.
And it even conveys,
with the part
at the end where the
ink runs a little dry,
the tip of the leaf where
it may get a bit ragged.
And so with immense
repetitive rapidity,
all kinds of different
sorts of leaves
can be drawn with a
brush-- little leaves
or wisps of grass.
And there is a book called "The
Mustard Seed Garden," which
is published in this
country under the title
"The Tao of Painting," T-A-O of
painting, by Mai-Mai Sze, which
shows all the formal executions
the artist goes through
to convey different
shapes-- clouds,
so on-- all in accordance
with the nature of the brush.
Now, here for example is a
painting by the Japanese artist
Josetsu, showing a very
masterly study of bamboos.
If you look a little bit over
to the left of the painting,
you can see a spray of bamboos
almost just within view.
And actually, the painting
shows a rather amusing subject.
It's a man trying to
catch a fish in a gourd.
And this is suggestive
of the futile attempt
to grasp life in
intellectual terms,
to catch the mystery
of being in words.
And in the same way, there is
a Chinese proverb which says,
"One picture is
worth 10,000 words."
You see, the problem
is painting is perhaps
a little closer to the
real world than talking.
If I wanted to show you, for
example, how to do something
rather complex,
like tying a knot,
it would be very difficult
to explain in so many words
how that knot is to be tied.
But in an instant,
I can show you.
And in this way, the
picture shows us far more
than words ever could, and
so it's closer to nature.
So then the question arises,
is painting something
purely representational?
Is it an activity,
in other words,
in which man confronts nature,
looks at it, and copies it?
This is a problem that arose
not only in the Far East,
but also arises today in the
world of contemporary art,
contemporary painting,
which incidentally has felt
to some considerable extent the
influence of Far Eastern ideas
and particularly of Zen.
Now, very often now we go to
our museums and art galleries.
And we see something on the
walls, which an ordinary Joe
says, that doesn't look
to me like a painting.
No.
Because he has expected to see
a representation of something.
He has expected to see
the artist do by hand what
the camera does mechanically.
And it doesn't strike him
that a painting does not
have to be a picture.
It doesn't necessarily
have to copy nature.
And thus in the Far
East, under the influence
of Taoism and
Buddhism, there has
been evolved what you might call
the natural art of painting,
or painting considered
not as a copy of nature,
but as a work of nature.
And this has been shown
in an exemplary way
by artists who were
trained in Zen.
In other words, they
would master a technique
by all kinds of
careful training.
And then, when that mastery
of technique-- first of all,
learning to write
Chinese characters;
after that, learning
the basic alphabet of
strokes necessary for painting.
When they had mastered
that technique,
they would give themselves
up completely to spontaneity.
One of the most interesting
examples of this
is a great Japanese master of
the 13th century called Sesshu.
And if you look closely
at this painting,
you can see two things.
First of all, there's it's
undoubted technical excellence.
And secondly, if
you look closely,
you can see its
relationship to writing,
to the use of the brush
for drawing letters-- what
you might call the calligraphic.
Perhaps you know the
word calligraphic simply
means beauty of writing.
So calligraphy is
beautiful writing.
But you can see the calligraphic
character of this painting.
And you can see that Sesshu had
the most astonishing technique.
He was no one who,
like some people
suspect some contemporary
artists of being,
a person who could
draw, and therefore
did something formless instead.
But now what happens
when a man like Sesshu
really lets himself go?
What is it?
It's not, perhaps,
until you begin
to move up the
painting a bit and see
what lies above that
you begin to recognize
that this is a
mountain landscape.
And this is done with
incredible speed.
Sesshu sometimes, in order to
get a kind of rough effect,
would use straw with the
ink on instead of a brush.
Now, what happens when the
same thing is done in writing?
The formal character
of writing gives way
to a purely spontaneous
way of writing
in what is called grass style.
Here is a poem which
says, "The morning dawns,
but the dusky
night follows soon.
So is life like a
crystal drop of dew.
Unconcerned, the morning
glory goes on, blooming,
blooming, its short
yet full life."
Well, I happen to
know the translation,
but I can assure
you that when you
get into that kind of grass
style of writing, which
looks almost like the
tendrils of the morning glory,
Japanese has almost as much
difficulty in reading it
as we have.
Now let us consider the
medium more carefully
with which this work is done.
First of all,
consider the brush.
A great deal of our
painting is, of course,
done with rather firm brushes
with the kind of bristles
in use for oil.
But the Chinese brush is an
astonishingly flexible thing.
And notice that is used
with the wrist unsupported.
You don't use it like this
and scratch your drawing away
as we do with a pen.
Your arm is free.
And therefore, as it were, the
dynamics of your whole body
go into making a brush stroke.
And in this way, the brush being
so responsive to your slightest
motion reveals character more
strongly than anything else.
Next, consider ink.
Actually, although
this is black ink
rubbed from a
solid stick of ink,
you might say that it's
capable of enormous variations
in color.
You can mix it with
varying degrees of water
and show all kinds
of depths of black
so that it has
tremendous variation.
And also here, where
the brush runs dry,
you get a kind of what they
call flying hairlines, which
show the motion of the stroke.
You know sometimes when
we want to show motion,
and somebody, say,
is moving his hand--
and here we've got an arm, and
somebody is hitting somebody
over the head with it.
Well, to show that
the arm is moving,
we do little things like this.
Here's a hammer in
the hand, you see,
and the hammer's coming down.
Well, to show
motion, we do this.
But in this way, motion is shown
in Chinese painting and writing
by the flying hairlines
of the brush, which
give a dynamic quality.
Now, another thing that's very
important about the medium
for purposes of Zen
art is the quality
of the paper or silk upon which
the painting or writing is
done.
This is absorbent paper.
And therefore you notice that
if I don't draw a line smoothly,
that I hesitate,
in a little while,
you will see that becomes an
area where too much ink has run
onto the paper, and
you get a bulge.
And therefore, unless
you intentionally
want a bulge at a
particular point,
your motion writing with the
brush must be entirely smooth.
There I want it to bulge.
And in this sense,
that is a kind
of parallel between
painting and life.
You know as Omar Khayyam says,
"The moving finger writes,
and having writ, moves on.
Not all thy piety nor
wit can lure it back
to cancel half a line,
nor all thy tears
wash out a word of it."
And so in the same
way, the painter
or the writer in this medium
has to move without hesitation.
As our own proverb says,
he who hesitates is lost.
And thus it involves
particularly the quality
of what is called in
Zen [FOREIGN LANGUAGE],
going straight
aheadness without doubt.
And this quality, when it is
ingrained in our character
through learning to trust
our own spontaneity,
becomes the greatest
instrument of the artist.
And the man, in other words,
who has that character,
can, however he goes at
this, hardly make a mistake.
His character is revealed
and everything he does.
And as his action is
completely unobstructed,
so there is a kind of flowing
vitality in all of his work.
So in the sense the man who is,
as it were, dead to himself,
there is a Zen poem which
says, "While living,
be a dead man, thoroughly dead.
And then whatever you do, just
as you will, will be right."
So a man who has this
becomes a superb artist.
Now, one of the most interesting
characteristics of Zen art
is its kind of playfulness.
Because you see, a person
who has died to himself
doesn't take himself
seriously any longer.
He has a sense of life, as
we say in our own slang,
not being any longer a drag.
He's not in conflict
with himself.
He has already, as it were,
given himself up to death.
And so here is his
spirit in a painting
by Sengai, a great Zen
master of the 17th century,
which shows Hotei.
You often see him as the
so-called Fat Buddha.
You can buy figures of him
in any Chinese artwork store.
Hotei-- he is a kind of a tramp.
And here he's waking
up from his sleep.
And the poem written
above him on the painting
says, "Buddha is already dead.
Maitreya-- who is supposed
to be the next Buddha
to come in many years--
Maitreya has not yet come.
I have had a wonderful
sleep and didn't even dream
about Confucious."
It seems, you see a kind
of irreligious attitude.
For just as the art
of Zen artless art,
so the religion of Zen is
religion without religiosity.
The masters are never drawn in
a kind of pompous, sacred style,
but always looking more
like hobos and bums.
This painting is a
Chinese painting entitled
"Zen Master in
Meditation," but he
looks more as if he was asleep.
And this I would call,
this drawing of the saint
meditating as if he
were asleep, a kind
of religion of no
religion, which
doesn't take itself seriously.
There was once a Zen student
who asked his teacher how
he was getting along
in his study of Zen.
The teacher said,
you're all right,
but you've got a trivial fault.
And what's that?
You've all together too
much Zen, he replied.
Well, he said, if
you're studying Zen,
isn't it very natural
to talk about it?
Oh, he said, when it's like
an everyday conversation,
it's somewhat better.
And here you see in
another painting by Sengai,
it's an everyday
matter, just blossoms.
And yet this is Zen,
all these marvelous
persimmons by the great
Chinese Zen monk Mu Chi.
Just persimmons, sitting
there, in a spirit of what
is called in Japanese sonomama.
Sonomama means just like that.
I can perhaps illustrate
the spirit of sonomama
by a haiku poems, which says,
"Weeds in the rice field.
Cut them down.
And sonomama--" just as
they are-- "fertilizer."
Or again, Sengai showing the
two Buddhist hermits, Hanshan
and Shide, looking
like a pair of idiots.
Because again, just as Zen
represents its religion
in the secular, its holiness
in a kind of fat tramp,
looking as if he
was fast asleep,
and its wisdom as the
behavior of a lunatic.
You see, it doesn't
take itself seriously.
Here is a Zen painter of modern
times, Saburo Hasegawa, a self
portrait.
And the writing thing underneath
is a quotation from Lao Tzu.
"The people of the
world seem so satisfied,
as if partaking of
a formal dinner,
as if climbing a
terrace in spring time.
I alone am mild, like
one with nothing to do,
like a baby that cannot
get smile, unattached,
as if without a home.
The people of the world
seem to have everything.
But I seem to have
lost everything, minus
the heart of a fool."
And here again is another
piece by Hasegawa.
It's a print from
an old boat that
was washed up on the beach.
And the character written
over it is "time."
And here again, you see, in
this marvelous arrangement
of the natural grain and wood,
we have the artist expressing
once again that character I
showed you in the last talk,
[? "li," ?] which means the
infinitely complex patterning
of nature.
And so it is playing on.
And you may ask,
what does it mean?
What do the stars mean?
What does the wind say?
Where are the clouds going?
[MUSIC PLAYING]